- Brady, welcome to Talk Python to Me.
- Thanks for having me, Michael.
- Yeah, it's great to have you here.
I think people are gonna learn a lot
about some machine learning on this episode,
and you've got this really cool visual way,
this visual tool of working with machine learning projects.
And oftentimes people ask me,
like, hey, I'm not really a web developer,
but I have some machine learning stuff,
or I'm a data scientist,
and I wanna share it with people, how do I do that?
So your project might be a good answer
to that for some folks, right?
- Yeah, absolutely.
I think, yeah, Gradio is kind of built for that use case.
I think you can build like lots of complex stuff
with Gradio, like, you know, web apps and stuff,
but you could, it's optimized for the sort of like ML
use case, like how do you get like an ML workflow,
like on the web and share it with people
as quickly as possible,
that's kind of what Gradio is built for.
Awesome.
I've got it running on my computer.
How do I take it from a notebook to something
that other people who are not programmers can use, right?
- Yeah, exactly.
That's kind of it.
And with Gradle, it's like one line.
You can get a shareable link directly
from your Colab notebook, Jupyter notebook, SageMaker,
local, whatever.
Yeah, so it's really easy to share with people.
- Excellent.
All right, before we dive into that, let's start with you.
Quick story, quick introduction about you
and how you got into programming Python.
- Yeah, absolutely.
So I guess all the way from the beginning,
I graduated with a degree in statistics
and my first job was working as a data scientist in Chicago
and that was kind of doing more bread and butter
sort of data science-y stuff,
like you pull data from a database
and you train a model
and then you try to communicate the results with someone
and then at the time,
Yeah, I mean, it wasn't that long ago, but to me, it feels like it was like, a millennia ago.
Technologically speaking, it's so different.
Yeah.
Yeah, it was like a really, really, really long time ago.
Yeah, but then basically, like what, what happens or what happened to me a lot was just
like, okay, like, we need to like, we're training this model, like, how do we share, like, share
with like, the relevant like, stakeholders, right?
There's like a PM or like someone that's interested in this, like, how do you, how do we, how
do you make them care?
And then there really wasn't a good answer.
like you would have to like, you'd like compute like some metrics and then like, try to explain
what they mean. And you like draw like a bar plot or something. And it just like wasn't really
that, that useful. And I think it really kind of was, you know, to be fair, was kind of like a
skill gap. I didn't even know how to like build like an interactive website to kind of share with
people because like, you know, at the end of the day, what really what people really care about,
or, or how to make someone really care about it is again, play with it, right? Because like,
if you kind of show them these plots, and these metrics, it's like a machine learning models,
is like very abstract, right? It's like just this thing that's somewhere else. And then
like, this is kind of like the output of it, but it's not really even like the actual output.
It's just like some sort of summary statistics of it. Right. But if you give someone like,
this is what the model is, and you can let them like, manually play with the inputs and
see how the outputs change, you know, they get a sense of like, well, like what the model
is, and you know, how it works and stuff like that. Right. And I think, yeah, so that's
kind of where I learned about this problem and why this problem is important. And then
ever since then, I've been sort of devoting to, you know, devoting myself to working on
like open source tools to like make data science like more efficient. And like my, my, the
latest product that I worked on is called Cradio, which kind of does this. It basically
lets you turn a machine learning function into a web app in one line of code. And from
there, you can kind of jump off and build like, as complex of a web app as you want.
But from the beginning, you can kind of get up and running with just like basically two
lines of code.
So yeah.
Excellent.
I love it.
I mean, well, the you talked about, you know, let people play with the machine learning
model and you change, change the inputs and stuff.
It just completely changes the round trip speed because the alternative might be I'll
make I'll get you a PDF and you can read the report and then what if we change this?
All right, at tomorrow's meeting, I'll bring the new PDF.
It's like, no, no, no, no, no.
Just empower people and give them these tools.
And yet, at the same time, data scientists
are not web developers, certainly not
in the super dynamic front end AJAX callback
way of programming.
That's a different skill, to be sure.
And so it's not like their data science skills, by default,
make them able to build these.
And even if you could, is it a good use of your time, right?
Yeah, absolutely. And yeah, I think like, yeah, so it's like the PDF report is definitely
like one one way of doing it the other way that we tried to do sometimes is we'll just
hand it off to someone and like, we'll, we'll have them build the web, but then that just
takes longer, you have to like explain everything to them. Right? I think like the, you know,
the way to like, kind of make it really impactful as if, you know, the person who made the model
can they themselves, they can just create the web app, the demo, like immediately. And
And a lot of data scientists are in Python, so that means you need a Python-based tool
that can get you up and running really quickly.
And a lot of them, like you said, don't know about web programming, so you've got to abstract
that away as much as you can, as much as it makes sense.
So that they're not daunted or it's not like, "Okay, now I'm really good at PyTorch and
training all these things, and now I need to learn about servers and all that stuff."
It's almost a different skill set for a lot of people.
It really is.
And the hand it off to somebody else, it's slow,
but also it only works for certain situations.
A lot of data scientists, I suspect,
don't have a whole software team supporting them.
As they need, right?
They're the sole person at their company.
So you said you had gone into statistics
and found your way over to this side of that world.
Do you feel like it's kind of a golden age for statisticians
Now, because when I went to college, it's like, well, you could be an actuary or you
could work at an insurance company, or maybe some other company might be interested in
hiring somebody who does stats.
You work at the, you know, US, statistics.
Yeah, exactly.
and that was kind of, and now with the kind of blending into data science, there's
just, you know, it's so in demand.
So many is like, the world is so open for that now.
Yeah.
it definitely became a much sexier career.
And I think I kind of got lucky that I kind of got into it
like right as it was starting to take off.
Like at that point, like data science
wasn't really like a term yet.
I'm not that old, but yeah, at that time it wasn't really,
like there were like, I think at that point,
like they were called like, it's like research scientists
was more like the term, right?
Which still kind of sounds a little bit dry,
but then it got rebranded as data science.
Yeah, I mean, I think it's a, I mean,
I would say it's always a good time to study statistics.
I think like a lot of people that, yeah, I think if someone were to come up to me and
say like, I have no idea what I want to major in, but like I have some aptitude for math,
I would say like major in statistics, I think it's like really useful.
As like a lot of applications, but I think now also in terms of like, tech, I feel like
definitely like it's sort of like the, it's the era of like the Renaissance person, right?
Like you kind of have to know a little bit of everything now, right?
Yeah, I do.
stats, programming, math, like all these things are starting to like kind of blend together.
And yeah, I think it's kind of, you know, like a lot of people really respect kind of like pull
from all these disciplines, like seamlessly, right? And I think it's, yeah, I think that's
kind of where we are now. - Yeah, it's a super fun time. If
you're excited about always learning new things, and sort of bettering yourself and bringing in
in this thing and mixing it that way.
If you'd rather just kind of be done learning, maybe not so much.
Absolutely.
Yeah.
Can't just show up for 20 years.
It'd be okay.
I guess if you were like maintaining code, well, the code, it would be okay, but not,
not in the machine learning space and machine learning also is just crazy.
We've got large language models just running loose everywhere now.
What do you think about all that?
Yeah.
I mean, I think it's definitely like a very exciting time to be alive.
I think it's pretty crazy that, you know, when I started, when I got started in ML,
like six years ago, it was, it definitely was like very niche, right?
And like the tools that people use and like the language about it kind of definitely did
not penetrate the mainstream.
But now, you know, it seems like, you know, like the technologies and the algorithms,
the models, the data sets are all things that people talk about now, right?
And I think we've all had an older relative ask us about, you know, ChatGPT, or, you
know, like the latest trend or like, stable diffusion with the
image, the AI image generation, I think it kind of has
penetrated, you know, every part of society, I think part of,
you know, I think like part of the reason why that is one,
because like, one, like the technology is like way more
impressive now, right? Like these algorithms are able to do
things that were, you know, unimaginable, like 2017, right
when I graduated college. But, but also, it's just like, these
models are much easier to share and use now, right. And I think,
I think part of the reason why ChatsVT took off so quickly was just the interface is so intuitive.
We've been chatting with each other for decades over the internet, right?
And the user interface is so simple and it kind of fits our mental model so quickly or so easily.
But under the hood, it's this incredibly complex process, right?
Right, right.
Yeah. Right. And I think that's kind of like where tools like radio kind of come into play, right?
It's just like, there's a bunch of like, incredible, like amazing research happening. But unless other
people can, you know, use it, play with it, evaluate it, like, it's almost as if it like, it
doesn't exist, right? And I think radio, yeah, really helps you create like a demo and app that
other people can use and play with and evaluate your model. And then, you know, and then just
like that, anyone can can use it, right? Like, you don't, you no longer have to be like a technical
person. You know, you don't have to like Python some script or something and then like go
to like a website, right? You just go to a website, right? You can just send someone
a link and then they can play with this state of the art. It's pretty, pretty cool.
You know, can you control a combo box and a button? Yeah, something like that, right?
Yeah, then you're qualified. Yeah, it's wild. One of the things that surprises me is for
such insane technology that leverages so many servers to ChatGPT and friends, the user
interface for it is so mundane.
I don't mean that as a derogatory term, but it's just like, well, you just talk to it
in this text box and it just talks.
There's not like a crazy new UI where you put on 3D glasses and where you just, it's
just a chat box.
But what it does is incredible.
Similar for Midjourney and other things.
You just slash imagine.
Just chat.
Just chat with it.
But so there's this sort of weird paradox of like this incredible simple way to interact
with it.
And yet what it does is, I guess it's a natural way to interact with it, which is what's surprising.
Yeah.
- Yeah, I mean, I think that part of the reason,
I think it's just like the natural language interface,
I think a lot of people resonate with that.
I think you don't have to explain it, right?
You just type something and then it'll respond, right?
Like it won't error, right?
And I think, even like stuff
that isn't just purely chat-based, I think,
like stable diffusion, like the web UI, right?
I think it has a lot of controls, right?
But at the end of the day,
it's kind of like a Photoshop-esque interface, right?
It's like someone who's used to that kind of software like it's kind of what they expect
where you like upload an image and then you like, you know, you can like
Get a tool to like blur something out and then like, you know, you can in paint it or out paint it
and stuff like that, so
yeah, I think like the
You know, I forgot who said it but I think some you know, someone said that like, you know
MLS like it's like not really like the product. It's like the
It's kind of like in the background right like, you know
like the most successful ML products,
like don't really feel like they're ML, right?
It's kind of like the ML is kind of like abstracted away
and it just makes your experience like that much better.
Right. And I think that's kind of what all these different
tools are showing.
- Amazing.
All right. So let's talk about Gradio
and I'm gonna ask you to do something a little bit funky
to kick this off, but let's talk about with just like
what other apps are like Gradio.
So things that come to mind for me are like StreamYard,
for example, so I sort of made stream I'm reading the words of
our app that we're using stream let not stream yard, streamlet
and other give people a sense of like, what are what are the
categories of apps that's kind of in the same space so they can
get a mental model for what radio? Yeah, for sure. Yeah. So
I think like streamlet is a good comparison. Like plotly dash, I
I think is also like in the same ecosystem,
you know, Shiny, if you know, I think.
- Shiny, yeah.
- Yeah, I think like the first--
- I just had Joe on to talk about Shiny for Python.
- Yeah.
- Recently, yeah.
- Oh, no way.
Yeah, I think it's kind of like, yeah,
they're all definitely in the same ecosystem, right?
And I think, you know, if you go to the Gradio homepage,
like, you know, gradio.app, right?
You can kind of see some of the apps
that you can build with Gradio really quickly.
But that, yeah, but that doesn't necessarily limit,
like what you see on the landing page
is not all that you can build with Gradio.
I think those are just like the eye-catching quick examples
just because, you know, like I said,
like Gradio's kind of built to get these kind of examples
up and running really quickly,
but you can do like lots of complex stuff with Gradio.
- Excellent, yeah, so we'll, let's dive into it.
So you've already given it a bit of a introduction for us.
Maybe we could, let's see, maybe we could work on,
just start by discussing how you might take,
you've got some different types of problems
you can solve on your homepage,
and it shows you the code, the entire code,
and then the UI that comes out of it.
So maybe you could just talk us through
the sketch recognition, it's one of the types of UIs
you could build here.
So sketch recognition, you just kind of draw,
that's definitely a bird I drew there,
or a mountain, I'm not sure.
It could be either. Yeah, but I guess, you know, the, how do you
think about how do you think about radio? So radio is a, you
know, at the Python library, right? Python is the main
language used to interface or to build radio apps.
PIP install radio.
Yeah, you install radio, right? And then what does radio do at
the highest level radio turns a Python function, any Python
function into a interactive web app. Right. So when you think of
function, right, function has inputs and outputs. So, in, so
these inputs correspond, these inputs and outputs correspond to
things that will be drawn on the page, right, and Gradio comes
with a standard set of inputs, right, there's like text boxes,
drop downs, you know, number fields, data frames, you know,
plots, anything like that, but also like drawing tools like a
sketchpad. And then the output, you know, it can be, you know,
It can be any of these other components, but it could also be like a label, right, to show
like a machine learning prediction.
Right, so all you need to do is take, you know, write a plain Python function that takes
in a drawing and returns a set of probabilities or competences.
And then Gradio can kind of wrap that in one line of code and turned it into an interactive
web app.
Like, you know, like we see here, if you're on the YouTube stream, you can kind of see
what Michael is doing, you know, there's like a sketch pad area, and then he can kind of
scribble on it and then immediately he'll get a prediction out.
- Yeah, let's see if I can draw an owl, maybe.
Let's see how I do.
- I don't know, yeah, syringe. We've got to make the model better, right?
- It could be a cat. It definitely could be a cat.
- I can see that. - I think I've got to make my drawing better.
So the idea is you have a regular function
that takes the inputs and outputs.
There's no UI whatsoever.
And there's also no reactive programming.
You're not hooking events where I redraw and it just reruns.
That's not part of my code I write as a Python person.
And then you just say gr.interface,
give it the function, and then you say the inputs are--
in this case, you say it's just a sketchpad.
And so I get this UI that I can draw on,
that I've been attempting to draw an owl on.
It's probably missing the eyes.
I think it's the eyes that are missing.
- Ladder. - Now it's a ladder.
It's not about protesting the underlying model, is it?
And then you say the outputs in our label.
Now a lot of UIs, people might think a label
is just a non-interactive piece of text,
but here there's more of a machine learning label, right?
You've got like a cool horizontal bar graph
that has percentages and talks about its guesses.
- So it's like a machine learning labeled response report,
not just a cat.
- Exactly, yeah.
I think a machine learning person,
when they see label, they kind of think this, right?
They don't think of the standard web,
just like a text box, right?
- Yeah, like label four type of thing.
- Right, so that's one of the things that,
or one of the ways that Gradio
kind of like is built for that kind of audience, right?
It's like the high level primitives
to kind of match that mental model, right?
And then, yeah, so like one thing you mentioned earlier
is that there's no like explicit reactivity
that you as a programmer have to write.
That's definitely true in the gr.interface case.
Gr.interface kind of like abstracts all that away from you,
but Gradle also--
- So this is your simple case,
like I just want, just run this function
with these inputs and outputs
and I want a real basic variant, okay?
- Right, and then Gradle also offers like a lower level API
where you can kind of like explicitly control the layout,
So right now everything is like side by side.
You can put them horizontally across columns, rows, you can add components, right?
And then you can also, you know, be more explicit in saying like, okay, when this input changes,
run this function and then that will populate this and stuff like that.
And you can kind of change these things together.
So yeah, but maybe it's expensive to generate some portion and you want to cache it as much
as possible.
Right.
Or yeah, you just want to like be have like more control over like exactly what happens when when things change, right?
You could be able to give you that that control but for a lot of use cases you can get you know
You can get really far with your that interface and then the other companion piece which isn't on the landing page because we just we just
Released it, you know, maybe like two weeks ago. It's dr. Chat interface, right?
So you could build like I'll address it to an LM or something. Yeah, you can build a chat UI
For like yeah like an LLM
you know, just in one line of code.
And I think, you know, I can try to maybe find an example of that real quick.
- Sure. Yeah, while you're looking, do you offer any guidance or any opinionated
stuff on which LLM to choose? Or do you just say...
- Any...
- It's just a chat interface and you write the code to make it happen?
- Yeah, yeah. You just write the code to...yeah, just like, given the message,
what should the response be? And then...
- Right.
- Yeah.
- That's the interface.
Yeah, and then, you know.
- There's some interesting options people might want to pick.
Obviously you could pick open AI and use their API,
but there's things like private GPT,
which allows you to ask questions about your documents,
but 100% private, right?
You could just like give it, you know,
hundreds of docs and say, learn these,
and we're gonna talk to you about it, you know,
or something along those lines.
There's the Lang chain, right?
- Yeah, there's, yeah.
- Which is a pretty interesting option.
- There's a--
- These things.
- Llama, like the new Llama 2.
- Yeah, the Llama 2.
- Yeah, so I think in the chat,
I just posted like a great Llama 2 UI that we can show.
- Yes. - And it's on Hugging Face.
So I think we can kind of talk about
the hosting on Hugging Face as well.
- Yeah, okay.
- Yeah, so this is the chat UI.
So it's, you know, if you were to scroll down a little bit,
it's just, it's kind of like a--
- The UI says chat bot.
I can type a message.
- Yeah.
- I'll ask it what the podcast is.
Hey, I'm here to help you.
Talk Python is a podcast and community dedicated
to helping developers improve their skills,
interviews and experts in the field.
That's you, Freddy.
And resources, yeah, what do you wanna know?
- Yeah, so under the hood,
this is using LLAMA2, 70 billion LLM.
- Nice, I can ask what the latest episode is.
So it gives me a sense how far back it goes.
That's about two years old.
So, okay.
- Yeah, it makes sense.
- Oh wait, no, this is not so sure about that.
Yeah, I think there's a little bit of a mismatch,
but anyway, this is really cool.
So you basically plug in whatever LLM you want to
into this and they put the, or you put the LLM too.
- Exactly, yeah.
And then if you go, you know,
If you scroll up a little bit in the website,
if you see those three bars, I think.
- Yeah, the hamburger deal.
- Oh, no, no, sorry, that's not it.
And where is it?
It's in, oh.
- There are three dots, maybe?
- Oh, I guess maybe because you don't have an account,
you can't see the file.
Oh, yeah, if you go to files, there, if you go to files,
and go to app.py, this is the source code
of the Gradle demo.
If you scroll down, so this is kind of just like the helper text and
then this is the actual prediction function, it's about 20 lines of code.
But if you scroll down, you see the chat interface code.
>> There you go, with GR blocks as data, create a tab.
>> And then, but yeah, the important thing is that GR chat interface is just
it's just like a one line way to create a chat bot.
It works similarly to the interface case, right?
There's just a function in this case that it's an LLM, so
So it handles like the responding to each user message.
And then you just call that and then you can kind of call launch and
then you get a UI.
Yeah, so it's- >> Nice.
>> Yeah, so you get like a chat to BTS UI and in this case,
it's 100 lines of code, but yeah, pretty simple.
>> That is simple, and one of the things that's pretty cool here is for
the chat section, you hook it to the type you set up
is a streaming type versus the place I type is a batch.
And then the function you give it is a generator
with yield keyword.
So it just, as you go through it,
it makes choices and sends them back.
That's a pretty advanced interaction
for the UI to be, to run in like that.
That's cool.
- Yeah, yeah.
So I think it's, you know, in order to get streaming,
like there's no special syntax.
You can just use the normal Python yield
and then Grado knows how to like, you know,
feed that iteratively, you know,
feed that to the front end
and then you get like this responsive streaming UI.
That's a really good call out.
Yeah, so it's just kind of like the, you know,
Grado tries to use like the core Python syntax
and the core Python data types as much as possible.
Just so to make it easier for people to get up and running.
- So I just blew through this really quickly here,
But basically, from what I can tell,
is the amount of code here to actually implement this
that is not just the details of giving this text,
make the LLM do the thing, is five lines of code.
- Yeah.
- Yeah, that's definitely true.
- That should make people pretty excited about like,
hey, I can write five lines of code,
especially with an example to work from.
- Exactly, yeah.
So yeah, definitely we need to get chat interface
up in the landing page.
but yeah, I think it's super easy to get complex demos,
you know, running and think it's just a handful lines of code.
- Yeah.
We mentioned Shiny a little bit.
Umar asks, how does it compare to Shiny?
How familiar with Shiny?
Can you?
- I'm not super familiar.
No.
- Yeah, I'm obviously not familiar.
I'm familiar with Shiny,
but not well enough to compare it directly to Gradio either.
I mean, they live in the same general world
of trying to kind of create a UI
that's, you don't have to write web apps for.
But I don't think they're totally the same,
but they're similar.
Okay, so we talked about setting up pip install, that's easy.
You say you can choose from a variety of interface types.
These are the widgets that you're talking about, right?
- Yeah, exactly, yeah.
Yeah, so you could, like,
in terms of like the inputs and the outputs,
you know, we call them components,
but yeah, there's, if you go to the docs page,
which is about, we have about 30-something components.
Yeah, so you know, code, buttons, data frames,
plots, files, pretty much like name it.
And we're adding components all the time.
And we're also, one of the things that we're gonna work on
is letting the community create their own components.
So like if you have your own particular demo,
your own particular web app, and you want this new component
that we don't support, like how do you,
we're working to make it easy for you to do that
without having to merge something into a 3DO upstream,
and then other people can play with it.
So we're working on that as well.
But for the time being, it's yeah,
about these like 30 something components.
And then yeah, you can mix and match them
however you want.
- You've got quite a bit of them.
Many of them I expect people would imagine.
So you've got button.
Let's see, you've got data frame, which is pretty cool.
And then gallery image. - The plots.
The plots, like the line plot, scatter plot,
those are all pretty cool.
But you've also got things like audio.
What's the story with audio?
This is how you--
- Yeah, you can upload like an MP3 or a WAV file directly.
- Maybe for transcripts or sentiment analysis or something.
- Exactly, like Whisper, essentially like audio transcription
or also just synthetic audio, right?
So there's like a bark and there's all these
like kind of like machine learning demos
they go text to speech basically,
and they're really advanced.
So if you wanted to display that,
right, like you ingest text, come out with audio,
like you can use like an audio output component,
and then you get like a, yeah, you get like a,
you can play the audio directly in the browser.
- Okay, I got it.
So it's like a, it's just like an audio tag in HTML,
but obviously it does more from the UI, I'm sure,
but it's to not just, I guess you would just do file
if you really wanted to drop an MP3,
but if you wanted to generate audio
and let people see the results,
then this audio thing would be the way to go.
- Yeah, and then you could also,
the audio could also be like the input, right?
You could just drag and drop, but you know,
if you click on that box,
it'll let you upload an audio if you have it,
and then you could-- - Interesting.
- You could play it. - I'm sure I have some audio.
- Yeah.
- I know that I have some, but how,
let's see if I can find something to upload here.
Here, I'll upload a sponsor.
Here, let me find one.
Yeah, this is super short.
So I can upload, yeah, look at that.
And it just becomes a player, excellent.
- And you can play it,
and then you can also edit it as well.
So you see that little pencil?
You could like kind of trim it.
- Oh, I could do like trim it to make it shorter.
- Yeah, yeah.
So, yeah, lots of cool components like that,
that we have, you know.
Yeah, all the standard form stuff,
like sliders and dropdowns and yeah,
like highlighted text.
And, you know, yeah, so the standard like form stuff,
but then there's also like complex, you know,
not complex, but more maybe domain specific ML stuff.
So like highlighted text, for example,
like really big and like part of speech tagging,
like NLP, right?
So you can kind of get like a highlighted,
it's like, depending on the tag that you apply
to each word in the text,
you'd get like different coloring and stuff like that.
Yeah, so it's, you know, for MLP, like model 3D.
So there's a lot of ML demos that come out
that you can generate model 3D assets directly.
So this lets you display them as well.
So yeah, so everywhere-- we have everything
from the most basic general web app stuff,
kind of domain-specific machine learning components as well.
- Yeah, let's see what else jumps out here.
We have video as well, which is pretty cool.
JSON, yeah, there's a lot of what you can type in.
JSON, I guess it probably validates it
and auto-formats it or something,
rather than just--
- Yeah, when you return the JSON,
it highlights it for you.
You can copy it directly as well.
- Okay, so when we were talking about
the Gradio.interface thing,
it had, well, here's an input and here's an output.
It's plural.
- So could you have, could I say there's a sketch pad
and a text box?
- Yeah.
- As input and then the outputs are, I don't know,
three other things and.
- Yeah, that's a really good observation.
Yeah, so you can have more than one input,
more than one output for sure, right?
So like if you go to the,
I think the time series forecasting demo,
I think that one has like two inputs.
- That's also on the homepage, yeah.
- Also on the homepage, right?
So you can pick like, you know, it's like a toy example,
like forecasting, your PyPy installs,
but you could pick, here has two inputs, right?
Like the time horizon and the library itself,
both of them are drop downs, right?
And then when either updates, the plot updates, right?
So there's also like how you can do plotting in Gradio.
And then also this is interesting,
this demo is built with like the lower level API.
You could build it with interface if you wanted to,
but just as an example,
it's built with like the lower level API.
- Cool.
- Yeah, so I guess there's probably a library
and time span to arguments to the function that you write.
And then just as you interact with these widgets,
it just recalls it with whatever the values are.
- Exactly, and then the function itself returns a plot.
So in this case, it's a plotly plot, right?
So by default, we ship with support for matplotlib,
plotly, bokeh, and alter.
- I see, so if I would create like a matplotlib object,
do all the stuff to it that I would do in a notebook.
Instead of calling show, I just return it from my function
and then it becomes part of the UI.
- Yep.
- Okay, yeah, that seems pretty straightforward.
- Yeah.
- And this one happens to be done with profit
at time series library.
Yeah, you've got integration with a bunch of cool
machine learning libraries here as well.
- Yeah, yeah, so the cool thing is,
you know, pretty much if you can write a Python function
for it, like it'll work with radio.
Like there really doesn't need to be,
you know, like us as the development teams
don't really need to build that many integrations to get anything that you're working with to
work with Gradio. Pretty much if you can call a bread and butter function to do it, and
we have like the supported output types and stuff like that, you can display it with Gradio.
Yeah. So yeah, there's a couple of demos, for example, like connecting to like databases
and stuff. You can connect to S3 if you want.
Oh, interesting.
Like you're not, I don't know exactly where they are now.
- Yeah, like this.
- It's gotta be one.
- Yeah.
- It looks like it might be one potentially.
Now, I'll click to find some S3 stuff.
Here's, yeah, there's gotta be something here somewhere.
Yeah, very cool.
So one of the things people may be wondering,
and the fact that I don't see a pricing up at the top,
it might be a big hint here.
What's the business model?
What's the story with this?
Is this just straight open source?
Is it a open core?
What's the story around your project?
- Yeah, so Gradio is completely open source
and you can host it anywhere.
So you're not tied into any platform.
Gradio did get acquired by Hugging Face
maybe like almost two years ago.
So Gradio integrates really tightly
with the Hugging Face ecosystem.
But all those integrations are normally free.
So for example, you could host radio demos on Hugging Face.
- Hugging Face spaces or something.
- Yeah, on Hugging Face spaces, right?
And then if your demo needs special hardware
or stuff like that, you could pay Hugging Face
to provision that for you.
But you're not paying for the radio, right?
You can, it's kind of like, you could use whatever you want
on Hugging Face spaces now, right?
It doesn't have the radio. - Excellent.
Yeah, yeah. - Yeah, so it's
freely available.
So it's completely open source with a kind of a Gradio
as a service via Hugging Space.
Hugging Space, yeah.
Yeah, on their spaces.
Say that fast a bunch of times.
So yeah, really cool.
One of the things people might not
know if they haven't heard of Gradio
before is if you go to your GitHub repo for it,
almost 21,000 GitHub stars.
That's some serious bit of attention that it's gotten.
Yeah, definitely.
We've seen a lot of growth in the last year and a half,
ever since the Hugging Face acquisition.
That's really helped us put the library
in front of a new audience.
And as well, with the recent advances in ML,
people want to build demos for ML models now.
So I think that's definitely helping Gradio as well.
- Yeah.
I'm trying to give people a sense of scale.
This is like a third of FastAPI, third of Flask.
Like that's a lot.
That's a lot of people using this.
So the reason I'm bringing that up is
it's not some brand new thing that you came up with
that seems kind of neat that maybe people could try,
but it's got a lot of users, right?
- Yeah, yeah, I think month to month,
we're seeing like hundreds of thousands of people
building these Gradio demos, repeatedly.
So yeah, definitely a lot of growth.
And yeah, Gradio is about five years old now, so it's not.
- Awesome, congrats, that's really cool.
- That's nothing new.
- Yeah, 3.9, almost 4 million monthly downloads.
- Yeah.
- That's a decent chunk.
All right, what do we think about,
I don't want to do an image in one.
So you can do other demos.
You've got here, you've got time series forecasting.
We talked about that as the multiple inputs.
XGBoost with explainability.
You want to tell us about this a little bit?
- Right, yeah.
So this is kind of, this one also I think has like,
you know, this one has like 12 inputs, right?
And the idea is, you know, like,
it's one of like these like kind of Kaggle-esque things
where you're like predicting income based on,
you know, a slew of predictors.
Right. And then like the cool thing is that, you know, this isn't explicitly built into
Gradle or yeah, this isn't explicitly built into Gradle, but you could you kind of hook
into the shop really easily, right? So if you hit explain, it'll, it'll, it'll try to
explain the prediction of the model and display it in a plot for you. Right. So, right. So
for those of you don't know, like shop is like this algorithm for explaining you know,
the predictions of like any machine learning model. And in this case, it's hooked, it's
it's hooking into XGBoost, right?
But there isn't like an explicit, you know,
in this demo, there isn't like an explicit radio feature
that's being used.
It's just kind of calling Shep directly
from this Python function
and then displaying the results as a plot.
So you can kind of, yeah.
- Yeah, so what people, what this thing does
is it's got a bunch of different sliders and dropdowns.
It says, given an age, your education level,
years of school, whether you're married or not,
all those male, female, how many hours a week you work,
and then it predicts, what is this like?
Yeah, predicts your yearly income.
And then this thing you're talking about
is with that model, you can ask it,
okay, well, of all these different things
we could put into it, what features,
what aspects of that are more important
and what are less important, right?
- Right.
- Okay, so right. - Exactly, right.
And then, yeah, so, you know, like the use cases,
you know, let's say like you are a data scientist that, you
know, is charged with building this kind of model. You know,
the first question after someone seeing the prediction is, you
know, someone might have like, why, like, why is it? Right.
And then, you know, you ideally want to like be able to explain
exactly what, what element of the predictors contributed to
the prediction the most. And there's a lot of tools that you
can use for that, right? Shab is, I think, like the most
well known to my to my understanding. And then, yeah, and then you can kind of just with radio
really easily just like, call that algorithm and then just display it in a plot, right. And then,
you know, in this example, like one of the inputs is like the capital gain, so like how much you
make on your investments, right. So and I think in this particular case, like the capital gain is
a really big, right. So obviously, like, because the capital gain is so big, in this particular
case, we predict that the income will be really big, right, because capital gain is pretty much,
and it's kind of synonymous with income really.
So yeah, so that's kind of what this is showing.
But yeah.
- Yeah, and I suspect this is important
for a lot of reasons.
You know, if you're building this for your company
or for some kind of project,
people wanna know, well, we have all these different inputs.
What ones actually matter in making a prediction?
Maybe only the top three are the ones that really matter
and you can throw out things like marital status.
Like it actually doesn't make much of a difference, right?
Or if you're a policy person and you know this model
actually matches real data, you could say,
well, we're trying to improve the policy
for a certain group of people.
We could focus on any of these aspects,
which one or two would make the biggest return
for our effort to make a change, right?
There's a lot of cool stuff that comes out of this, I think.
- Yeah, no, absolutely.
And then like you as a developer, I think it's,
you know, it's like the data scientist, right?
It's really easy to make this kind of thing, right?
Like this is like a GR interface, I believe, right?
So this is just one line of code to build this.
- Yeah, let's see here.
- I don't know, I think it's more.
Yeah, so it's not- - Somewhere.
Oh, it's the other one.
- Yeah, it's not GR.interface.
You know, the other API that we can talk about now
is called blocks.
But yeah, you can kind of- - Yeah, tell us about that.
- Yeah, so yeah, the way that it works
is that you declaratively define your UI, right?
So it's like this input is going to go in this column,
and you can kind of say, well, this input is a dropdown,
for example, right?
So in this example, there's lots of dropdown components,
lots of sliders for the age and stuff like that.
And then you kind of define all these components.
And then you can kind of define the reactivity separately.
So if you were to scroll down, you'll
see there should be a button dot click, right?
So whenever the predict button gets clicked, yeah,
So you call this function with these inputs
and then return this one thing.
So that's kind of like the model, right?
Right now it kind of looks like a lot of code
just 'cause there's a lot of inputs and stuff,
but at the end of the day, it's pretty simple.
You're just defining a UI and then you define
what happens when and then Gradle handles the rest.
- Yeah, it's pretty straightforward.
So people listen, basically the UI
for the more advanced version is you use context managers,
you create with blocks.
So then you'd say, here's something that goes across
and with another row, put some columns in there
with another row, and then that's kind of
how you build it up.
So it's pretty straightforward.
You know what it reminds me of a little bit
is it reminds me a little of Flutter.
Are you familiar with how Flutter looks?
- No.
- And the code.
I don't know if I can find a quick example,
but how about an example Flutter?
Come on.
It's really sort of hierarchical, so the thing that I think is interesting is the code
hierarchy matches the sort of UI hierarchy.
So it's kind of a code-driven UI, where as it gets more indented, that talks about, "Okay,
well that's a row," and then you kind of pop off and stuff.
It's real similar in that sense that it's kind of all right there in the code.
There's not a designer or a markup language or something like that.
But yeah, pretty cool.
Yeah.
So like the UI, it's all declarative.
Right.
So yeah, like you said, you just kind of say like, this is this row.
And then yeah, there's ways to control like the relative width of each of these columns,
for example.
So if you wanted that, you could.
And then another thing I saw, I can't remember what you demo is, I'm not going to pull it
But I saw that there's a way to pass like CSS
and styling over as well.
Is that right?
- Yeah, so there's a-- - That was my first thing.
- Yeah, so there's like a Python API
for like defining the theme, right?
So like every UI element has certain CSS variables
and you can control their value
via like the values of this Python class
that you then pass to your Gradle instance.
But at the same time, there's like a top level CSS parameter
that you could kind of, you know,
you can kind of do whatever you want in that case.
Like you don't have to use like the Python API
if you don't want to, like,
if there's something different that you want to change,
you can change, you know, via these CSS variables.
- Okay, so you're saying I could do something like,
in Python, I could say, well,
the style is button border width is three
and the color of the border is blue.
but if I just wanna have arbitrary CSS,
I can just go, here's your arbitrary CSS string,
go with that.
- Yeah, you could pass it a file
and then like it'll, we'll read that file
and then use that CSS in the demo.
Yeah, and then with that,
you can also kind of like add IDs
to each of the UI elements.
And then, you know, you could write your CSS
to target the IDs that you add, right?
So like, let's say like you only wanted to modify
like one button, you could do it that way.
>> Right, you just want to control one of the plots or something.
I guess if you're writing arbitrary code to return things like matplotlib plots,
you could do things like the XKCD matplotlib.
>> Yeah, for sure.
>> Right, like you could control, I mean, I'm kind of joking, but
it's also awesome.
But- >> No, I mean,
there's an XKCD radio theme, right?
So you can, let me show you.
>> There it is.
>> Yeah.
>> That takes it to another level. That's pretty excellent.
>> Yeah. That's a cool thing about the theming is that it's shareable.
Someone built this XKCD theme.
Then anyone can use this in their Gradio demo.
All you have to do is pass theme equals gstaff/xkcd,
and then your demo will look like the XKCD theme.
>> It's so good. I love it.
>> Yeah.
>> Oh my gosh. This is wild.
- Yeah, completely community driven.
So.
- Yeah, well done to whoever did this one.
That's really cool.
Yeah, I like it.
- Yeah, so if you, yeah, so it goes beyond the plot, right?
You could for sure return a plot in the XKCD theme,
but you could also have the whole demo in the XKCD theme.
- You know, I often pull this example of this theme,
this XKCD thing for Matplotlib because it's fun,
But also I think there's genuine value in putting together
something that looks like this.
Because if you show this to decision makers,
you know, bosses, managers, types,
and they see that they look at something
that looks like it's working and they're like,
oh, well, we're done then.
Like, no, no, no, we have two months more work.
We're not done.
But I click the button and it's giving me answers.
We're really not done.
You know, it's not scalable.
It's not this, it's not that, right?
It's only an estimate.
But if you put just an XKCD front end on it,
you're like, look, you see it's not done.
It's just, it's got squiggly lines, hand drawn.
It's clearly a prototype.
Like, oh yeah, okay.
But I could see where this is going.
I think actually psychologically,
it may have a big impact, even though it's silly.
- Yeah, it's a super interesting point.
Never thought about it that way.
But yeah, I mean, I think it definitely gives it
a little bit more like, you know, like sketch vibes.
You know, like this is kind of like-
- Yeah, yeah, like a wireframe vibe, yeah.
- Yeah, wireframe, like straight from the workshop.
Like, yeah.
- Exactly, yeah.
And that's what I was thinking,
'cause I presented projects to various stakeholders
when I used to do that kind of stuff.
And they'd be like, "Oh, well, that looks like
it's kind of done."
Like, no, we're gonna need some time
'cause it's really not done.
I know it looks good, but it's not.
- Yeah, you made it look too good, basically.
- Yeah, exactly.
That was a serious mistake.
Okay, so we got a little bit more time
to talk about a couple of things.
I wanna talk about how people actually share this.
You know, like we're still talking about a thing
I pip install locally and it has a UI, but what do I do?
I still don't want to set up a Linux machine
and Nginx and domains and all that.
So what are the options?
But before we get to that,
tell us a bit about the internals.
Like when you guys work on Gradio and I pip install it,
like what's running, what is this project?
- Yeah, for sure.
So the backend is a FastAPI server.
So what Gradle will do, it'll spin up a server for you.
And then that server will serve the front-end assets.
The front-end is built in Svelte.
And then basically, whenever these reactivity events happen,
what will happen is that the front-end will just
call the back-end API and then run your function
and then make sure that all the necessary processing that
needs to happen to get your data ready happens.
But at the end of the day, it's kind of a simple model in that sense.
Right. Obviously, there's like some more complications with, you know, like the streaming, for example.
So that's a whole kind of different code path almost.
But at the end of the day, it's kind of like a REST server that's talking with a JavaScript client.
So it's kind of like the standard developer tools story for Python people.
is it's not, some of it is Python, but you probably end up writing a lot of
JavaScript or TypeScript.
Yeah.
Like most of the tool for other people.
Right.
So they don't have to.
Yeah.
The I'm not, I'm not a huge Svelte expert.
I like, thankfully there's some of the people I work with are like really good
at, you know, the really knowledgeable and that stuff.
And like, yeah, like the front end code, I think it's, I think there's more
Svelte code than Python code.
Actually.
I'm curious.
Like what the, what the language says are.
Let's break it down.
65% Python, 16% Svelte, 13% TypeScript.
- Well, so I think the reason might be that
we have a lot of like demos and stuff that-
- Yeah.
- Yeah, I think there might be some stuff-
- Yeah, the demos are in there.
- Yeah, yeah, there's a lot of demos.
- So what would feature GitHub needs
as you navigate the source tree, right?
When I click on like client or demo or Gradio,
it would be awesome if those stats would also be repeated,
but just for that section of code, wouldn't that be great?
- Yeah.
- Like how much of the demos are Python?
I don't know.
Maybe I just want to know that, but that'd be cool.
Anyway, yeah, so I suspect that is,
there's probably a lot of code
and you've got a lot of notebooks and stuff in there too.
That probably puts a big.
- Yeah, but yeah, the, yeah,
like a lot of the code is actually,
yeah, JavaScript's built.
- Right, it's the, you know, take one for the team
so the rest of us don't have to write JavaScript.
- Exactly, yeah.
- Yeah, cool.
Okay, interesting, very nice.
And it says it can be embedded in a notebook,
which is interesting, or it can be presented as a webpage.
Tell us about this part.
- Right, so if you were to run this on any notebook,
you know, like Google Colab, for example,
I think this might be it.
Right, so if you call like,
the way that Gradle works, right,
like once you create your Gradle interface or blocks,
once you call launch,
that's kind of how you start up the server.
That's how you, you know,
kick off the whole process of serving this.
That'll create the server locally, right?
So like no data is like leaving your machine.
Right, and then if you click,
if you call launch on like a Jupyter Notebook,
Colab, SageMaker, like the UI will display
like in the notebook, right?
Right, and then you could, if you're doing locally as well,
like the, you know, you can kind of go to like
the local host URL and, you know, go to the server that way.
And then like the really cool thing is that,
yeah, there you go, there's a UI.
- Nice, okay.
- Yeah, so that's kind of what we mean
that it's like embedded locally.
And then if-- - So it feels good,
like a little bit like the
like I
widgets.
- It's similar to that, right? Like it'll
display right underneath the cell, right? And then if you
run the cell again, like you'll get
like a new server
basically, right? So you can kind of-- - Got it, okay.
- You can iteratively build these things, right?
- Is it running FastAPI
- Yeah, it's pretty nuts.
- Turtles all the way down.
- Yeah.
(laughs)
And then, yeah, so then,
that's kind of like what we mean,
that it can be embedded in a notebook.
And then you could also like host it anywhere, right?
So you could, you know, if you have your own,
if your machine is, you know, exposed to the internet,
right, you have like a fixed IP address,
you could just kind of give people that URL.
You could also share it another way, right?
Like, so,
you know, you could share it to your friends,
So every Gradle interface is like a launch method.
That's what kicks off the server.
And that takes a parameter called share.
So if you hit share equals through, true,
that'll create like a temporary link for 72 hours
so you could share with someone.
So you don't have to,
you could host it right on your laptop if you wanted to,
as long as your laptop is available.
- As long as you leave it on, yeah.
- Yeah, as long as you leave it on,
it's like not sleeping and stuff,
like people can access your demo.
So if you go back to that Colab notebook,
I think we might be able to like demo that.
- I see.
- So if you go to launch--
- So I just say here, say share equals true and rerun it.
- Yeah.
- So we're good.
- I scroll all the way down.
Yeah, so you see a greater dot live, right?
So if you click that--
- Wow, that totally works.
- Yeah, you can select that to wherever you want
and they can just use this.
- Okay.
- So that, yeah, like no, like no install needed, right?
Like if you're sharing this with your collaborator,
your PM, your manager, your friend, whatever,
you could just give them this link, right?
So you don't have to do anything.
So to get--
- Yeah, I guess it's probably worth emphasizing,
you should never try to host production.
- Absolutely. - Up over this,
it sounds like, 'cause it's only for a limited time
and it's just a good looking URL.
But so often you'll be in meetings over Zoom
or something else and they'll be like,
"Hey, what have you done?
"Can you show me?"
And then you're like, "All right,
let me do screen sharing.
Oh, I don't have, I'm not a host.
Can you make me a host?
Now can I, you're sharing, can I share?
And then finally you get it up and it's blocky
and they're like, oh, zoom in, it's too small.
I'm on my phone.
You know, this way you just take that
and you give it to them in the meeting, right?
And they have a full fidelity thing they can play with,
which is awesome.
- Yeah, they have the demo itself
that's running on your machine, right?
So they don't have to, you know, like, yeah, like no,
you don't have to install anything, right?
It's just, just go to your,
point your browser at this URL and then yeah,
It'll work for that quick demo.
- Yeah, exactly. - Use case as well.
Yeah, definitely don't use it for production.
Yeah, if you wanted to use, you know,
for production, I think, you know,
like the easiest, the absolute easiest way
is to use Hugging Face Spaces.
So if you go to Hugging Face Spaces,
it's basically like a drag and drop, right?
Like all you have to do is just drag your Gradle script
into like their UI and then that'll upload it.
And then like Gradle will already be installed
and then like the server will start
and then like there you have your permanent hosting.
And then it's also like, it has like a Git interface, right?
So like your demo has like, you know, several files,
like directory, there's like some assets,
some images that you need that you want to like upload
as well, like you could just like get pushed
to your Hugging Face space.
And then, you know, you can do it like that as well.
So, yeah.
- Okay, so you add it as an origin or something
and then just push to it.
- Yeah, so yeah, I could try to show it.
I don't know if you can have a,
can I share my screen?
I want to.
- Yeah, sure, click at the bottom.
Share, it's easier if you share an app, yeah.
- Okay, so I'm sharing this,
but if I go to like my Huggy Face account,
I can go here and then new space,
and then this is talk Python demo.
- Nice. - MIT.
- Oh yeah, do whatever you want with this.
- Yeah, right, so you could host Streamlight, Radio,
you know, Docker, you know, anything you want, right?
So for free, you know, very generous free tier,
you have two CPUs. - That is a generous free tier,
two CPUs, 16 gigs. - Yeah, and then--
- That's good. - Yeah, and then
the only caveat is that this will go to sleep
after like 72 hours if no one uses it, right?
So, but, you know, you could also like upgrade,
you know, if you have a machine learning model,
you need a GPU, you pay for the GPU per hour,
And then yeah, you just have public or private
and then you just create space.
And then yeah, this is kind of how
the Git interface real works, right?
So you could just get clone this
and then add your code and then just get push.
Or you could just copy this.
- Copy the code and just paste it to a file, yeah.
- Add file.
- It does feel very Git-like, right?
Even has the similar look and feel of like
you go to Git and you say add new file.
Yeah.
- So hello.
- Talk Python.
And then.
- A perfect commit message.
No, no comment, just blank.
I love it.
- And then we'll give it a.
- Give it a second to provision itself.
- Yeah, and then it should be.
That shouldn't take too long.
- So over here, they run in Docker containers
or Kubernetes or something like that?
- Yeah, it's a Docker container.
So what this is doing, it's that it's,
it has like a pre-configured Gradio Docker image, right?
That comes with, there we go, I've already built,
but it comes with Gradio and, you know,
like a bunch of standard, like data science libraries.
And then you, right, and then like it'll,
and then it adds your code to the container
and then it starts a container, right?
But you could also just use your own Docker file
if you wanted to.
- Okay.
- You can post whatever you want, right?
So here, let's say--
- Yeah, you gotta put your name and a present.
Wow, look at that.
- Michael, yeah.
So yeah, so that's--
- So in the time that we've been talking about this,
you've created a space and created a new UI and hosted it.
That's pretty ridiculous, yeah.
- And then you could just share this, share that stuff.
- Share the URL or whatever.
- Yeah, you can just share the URL with them
and then they have like a machine learning app
that they could share it, they can use with,
they could share with anyone
and it'll stay up.
Yeah, and like, it's just Git, right?
So if you have Git locally, if you know how to use Git,
you can very seamlessly use,
push to the Hugging Face platform.
There's no special--
- Yeah, yeah, that's super cool.
- Yeah.
- So what if I'm not a hugger?
What if I, for some reason, don't wanna use Hugging Face,
can I host this on behind Nginx
or somewhere if I like infrastructure,
or I'd like to do my infrastructure as a service?
- Yeah, no, absolutely.
you could just, just that app.py file, right?
Just call, you know, Python that app.py from your cloud
and then just make sure that the URL is, you know,
the port is accessible for the internet
and you just get that to everyone.
- Right, right.
Or front that with Nginx and put it in--
- Yeah, exactly.
- Let's encrypt and then just point it over to that URL
and let it go, it'd be pretty straightforward.
- Right, yeah, so you could, you could post it
wherever you want, it's just, you know,
it's all open source tech under the hood, right?
It's just FastAPI, belts,
and then some Python libraries, right?
There's no lock in anywhere.
- Yeah, cool.
So it's probably running uvicorn, I would guess,
as the server, which is production-ish.
I guess if you did really large scale,
you might wanna do g-unicorn with the uvicorn workers,
or rather than just uvicorn itself,
but for the failover and whatnot.
But still, that sounds like,
if these words sound familiar to you,
it should sound really familiar.
If they don't, then don't worry about it, right?
- Yeah, exactly.
- That's the standard Python web infrastructure stack
type of stuff.
- Right.
- Okay, so in that model, it's completely free, right?
It's open source, I can do, I can just run it there, right?
- Yeah, you just run it, run it wherever you want.
- Okay, yeah.
Very nice.
Well, Freddy, let's wrap up our conversation,
give a short on time with just where things are going.
We talked about where we are, where it came from,
where are we going?
- Yeah, no, that's, yeah, thanks for, yeah, thanks for that.
So I think, like, where we are, so I think,
we're trying to get Gradio into, like,
as many platforms as possible, right?
So, and like, as many kind of, like,
deployment modes as possible.
So, like, one of the cool projects that we're working on
is Gradio Wasm, right?
So, like, running Gradio entirely in the browser.
- Oh, okay.
- So, yeah, so that's, like, it's not ready,
it's not released yet, but it's something
that we're actively working on, right?
So you can, yeah, so if you wanted to like,
you know, just build your machine learning demo,
running everything directly in the browser, right?
There's like the ML for the web space is growing a lot.
It's advancing really quickly.
Like we're getting ready,
we're getting ready for that.
- So what's that look like in terms of foundations?
Is that Pyodide?
Is that PyScript?
Is that something else?
- It's using Pyodide right now.
- Okay.
- Yeah, so I think that's kind of how--
- Yeah, that's a pretty good choice
because one of the selling points of Pyodide,
not just that it has Python in the browser,
but that it has the ability,
it has a bunch of the machine learning libraries,
either available or compiled over to Wasm,
- Yeah. - The assembly.
And so you can actually do machine learning stuff,
not just like, hi, my name is plus name,
you know what I mean?
- Yeah.
Yeah, so that's one of the cool parts
we're working on this year.
The other cool project that we're working on is,
yeah, like the custom components, right?
So like, let's say that you wanted to, you know,
build your own custom machine learning demo,
your own custom web app, right?
But you need something that we don't have.
Giving you the API to kind of build that component locally,
and then just kind of hook it into the app
without having to merge anything into Gradio upstream.
So we're working on that actively.
So that'll be really exciting.
And then, yeah, really excited just 'cause
it'll enable a lot of people in the Gradio community
to kind of collaborate with each other
and kind of build really impressive stuff
kind of on their own, right?
Like they don't need the core development team necessarily
to build stuff for them. - Sure, kind of like
pytest plugins rather than trying to change pytest.
- Exactly, right? - Okay.
So yeah, really excited about that.
And then, yeah, I think the other cool stuff is that,
you know, we're, one thing that we didn't talk about
that I kind of want to talk about if we have time
is that, you know, all these demos that we've built
are sort of available via API, right?
So if you click on any of these demos,
like if you click on that first one,
if you scroll to the bottom,
and you'll see it says use via API, right?
So this gives you like a little code snippet,
So how you can call this demo from Python or JavaScript.
Right, so like, what does that mean, right?
Like that means that basically all these ML apps
that are available on HuggyFace
or just anywhere on the internet,
like they now become like building blocks
that you can use in your own workflow, right?
So, and actually this demo itself,
I'm familiar with it, it's actually really cool
'cause it's calling two other Gradio demos via API, right?
So this is an example of someone building their Gradio app
by calling other Gradio apps, right?
So, yeah, so we're kind of creating this ecosystem
where-- - It's like
Gradio microservices.
- Exactly, right?
So it's like all these Gradio apps or building blocks
that you can then kind of connect together via API.
And that's really cool, right?
'Cause like it basically means that
machine learning is available, you know,
like you don't need to use the GUI
to get state of the art machine learning, right?
You could kind of like use an API
and that means that you could put these models
like pretty much anywhere, right?
So like one of the cool things that we launched two weeks ago, I believe, or like a week and
a half ago is that you can deploy any, you can deploy like a Gradio chat bot to Discord,
like just one line of code, right?
So like, like if you, let's say if you have a Gradio app that, you know, talks with like,
you know, OpenAI, like QTT3 or LLAMA or, you know, any of these like open source LLMs,
if you can build a Gradio app for it, you can like seamlessly kind of like hook it into
your Discord server, right?
And then that's all built via this API functionality.
So this is something that I'm personally super excited about it.
We want to push this further.
Just because it's like, Gradle historically has been built for the UI,
but it can also be used to get these machine learning models into more places.
Yeah, so that's one of the things that I'm really excited about in the coming years,
making this a little bit more visible.
Yeah, you could integrate some really cool LLMs
and other types of chat into your--
Right, into your WhatsApp.
I imagine you could probably do it with Slack as well.
And if somebody asks in your company, how do I whatever,
the thing could go, hey, I'm private GPT.
I've already ingested all of our docs.
You want me to take a shot at answering that?
Sure, why not?
Exactly.
Yeah, that's kind of--
That's one of the pet projects I want to do
is just do that for the Gradio Discord.
So there's a Gradio Discord where you could
chat with the Gradio community.
And people ask questions in it.
But it'd be really cool if we had a Gradio chat bot
that knew a lot about Gradio that then you could just ask,
right, @bot or /GradioChat,
how do I, whatever, how do I display a plot, right?
And then it'll tell you,
just return a matplotlib from your--
- Right, and people could think,
well, why don't I just use ChatGPT or something?
But you teach it deeply.
You give it all the docs.
And you say, study this, and then I want to ask you about it.
And a lot of times, the docs and other things
go beyond the token level that the standard models can take.
I've tried to get GPT to tell me about transcripts on Talk Python,
and it can't even adjust one transcript
before it runs out of space.
I can't quite load all that.
I want to ask you about all of them.
You can't even do one.
- Yeah, this is not working for me.
- Exactly, right, so yeah, so you could fine tune
like an open source LLM and then host it
wherever you want, right?
- Yes, exactly.
- More control.
- Yeah, that's cool.
So you could teach all about Gradio.
Real quick question, Mr. Magnetic in the audience asks,
what about a Hugging Face desktop app
instead of the browser app?
- Yeah, so that's something that,
there's an open issue for that.
It's something that we've kind of been kicking around as well
it's just like, how do we get, you know,
like a Gradio desktop app as well?
So yes, stay tuned.
I think, let me try to find that issue
and then comment in the YouTube.
But yeah, would love your thoughts on that,
if anyone has thoughts on that.
But yeah, it's something we're thinking about.
It's not, I don't think it'll happen
maybe in the next like month or two,
but maybe before the end of the year
or next year it could happen.
- Excellent.
All right, well, I think that pretty well covers it.
It's a super exciting project.
So good luck with it.
I mean, already you've had a lot of luck with it,
so you don't need my wishes.
but further good luck on that.
And yeah, before we get out of here,
let me ask you a final question here.
If you're, you know, I always ask,
like to ask the guests are like some cool
PyPI project they've run across.
That's been really awesome.
Maybe not super popular, but is,
it's really kind of made a difference or you've like, wow,
how did I not know about this?
Any come to mind for you?
- Python project?
- Yeah, yeah.
Like something I can pip install.
- I think-
- Like FastAPI, but not FastAPI.
- Yeah, yeah.
I think when I was just starting out,
I think I was a really big noob
and I always ran into environment issues.
And then a friend of mine showed me a PipDep tree
and it shows you exactly why things get installed.
And yeah, I think it's really magical, honestly.
Yeah, I think it's really helpful just to figure out,
especially when someone files an issue
and we don't know what's wrong with them.
Sometimes I'll just like,
where did this thing even come from?
And then just use like TipTapTree.
I think that's really cool.
It's really simple.
But yeah, I think it definitely has saved me
a couple hours of time.
So yeah.
- That's cool.
I've used it for my own stuff.
I hadn't thought about using it for tech support,
but yeah, of course.
Because often people run into problems
'cause their environments are screwed up
and they say they have a thing or they don't,
or they say they have a version of a thing,
but they don't.
And with this, you can just say run this one command
and it'll give you like a really cool.
They have all these things installed
and this is installed because it's required.
Yeah, exactly.
It's really nice.
- Yeah.
- Cool, excellent recommendation.
All right, final call to action.
People wanna get started with Gradio.
What'd you tell them?
- Yeah, install Gradio and then go to gradioapp.com
and then see the demos there.
In our website, there's a link to our Discord server.
So yeah, join the Discord and say hi.
And then yeah, there's lots of people there
who are willing to help.
And then yeah, never hesitate to file an issue.
But yeah, I think what's really cool about this
is like seeing the demos that people build
and like people build stuff that I, you know,
frankly like push the limits
of what I thought people could build with Gradio.
And it's really cool seeing that.
So yeah, like don't be afraid to,
or don't hesitate to build really cool stuff with Gradio.
I think we're really good about amplifying that.
So if you have something really cool,
just tag the Grady Twitter account
or reach out to us on Discord or something.
We'll amplify it for you.
- Cool.
Well, excellent project and thank you for being on the show.
- Thank you for having me, Michael.
I had a lot of fun.
- Yeah, same.